---
date: 2017-11-16T17:00:00
title: 'Community Pharmacy Referral Service'
description: 'North of Tyne LPC is delighted that CPRS is now available for sign up via the NHSBSA website.  We hope that all pharmacy contractors will consider supporting this service that will reduce the burden on urgent and emergency care services for patients requiring low acuity advice and treatment.'
contact: "stephenblackman"
categories: ['News', 'Local-Services']
tags: ['CPRS']
---

##  Community Pharmacy Referral Service  ##
###  Signup Now Live  ##

North of Tyne LPC is delighted that CPRS is now available for [sign up via the NHSBSA website](http://www.nhsbsa.nhs.uk/CPRSnortheast).  We hope that all pharmacy contractors will consider supporting this service that will reduce the burden on urgent and emergency care services for patients requiring low acuity advice and treatment.

"This is a fantastic opportunity for community pharmacies and
pharmacists to showcase their value in primary care …"

Shabina Azmi MRPharmS AFHEA, Pharmacy Policy Manager, Company Chemists’ Association

Less than 1% of all NHS111 referrals result in a direction to a community pharmacy. Calls normally default to other primary care locations such as:

GP, in hours and out of hours
walk-in centres
A&E
These appointments block access to GP appointments for patients with greater clinical need.

####  Aim of the Service

Low acuity referrals occur throughout the week. Evenings and weekends generate the highest demand for Urgent Care due to the unavailability of GP Practices and some pharmacies. However, during the week, capacity will also be beneficial.

NHS England is commissioning this national NHS Community Pharmacy Referral Service pilot (‘CPRS’), via referral from NHS 111. Its aim is to ensure that patients have access to improved levels of care, closer to home, with a self-care emphasis.

####  What the Service will Provide

The agreement is for the pharmacy to provide self-care advice and support. This will include printed information to all people referred to the pharmacy by NHS 111, due to a specified low acuity condition.

The end points of the consultation may include: 
advice given only
advice and the sale of an OTC medicine
advice and referral into the pharmacy local MAS (dependent on local commissioning arrangements - please see each service specification)
advice and ‘direct dial’ access to GP to set up an appointment (each pharmacy will use a local arrangement for this)
advice and signpost on to another service
How to Access the Service

Any patient, even those registered with a GP from outside the North East area, can access CPRS, as they would likely still have attended another care location in the area. 

To access the service, patients must:

have called NHS111 and been referred are eligible to receive advice and treatment
opt-in 
be assessed by the pharmacy, potentially being referred to other health and social care professionals, where appropriate
Patients who wish to consult their GP or other healthcare provider for their condition are still free to do so. 

The NHS CPRS will commence from 4th December 2017 and run until 31 March 2018.

####  Register to Provide the Service

If you intend to provide the service between 4 December 2017 and 31 March 2018, you must register your pharmacy’s details with NHS England first by completing the [sign up form on the NHSBSA website](http://www.nhsbsa.nhs.uk/CPRSnortheast).

All regional LPCs and LPNs have been involved in the development of this service including the service specification and funding.  We hope that all contractors able to meet the service requirements will consider supporting this service.  As with all services, contractors are advised to read the service specification and make themselves familiar with the terms and conditions before agreeing to the service.

####  Please contact us if you have any questions about this service.
