---
date: 2018-03-29T17:00:00
title: 'Flu Ordering'
description: 'Important information regarding delivery of adjuvanted trivalent influenza vaccine (aTIV) (Fluad, Seqirus) for 
all those aged 65 and over'
contact: "stephenblackman"
categories: ['News', 'Flu']
tags: ['PSNC', 'Flu']
---

Earlier this year, NHS England [wrote to community pharmacy contractors and general practices](http://psnc.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/07648-Vaccine-ordering-for-2018-19-influenza-season-GPpharm-05022018.docx.pdf) 
to advise them that for the 2018/19 flu vaccination campaign, adjuvanted trivalent influenza vaccine (aTIV) (Fluad, Seqirus) should 
be offered to all those aged 65 and over, whilst adults aged under 65 in clinical at-risk groups should be offered 
a quadrivalent influenza vaccine (QIV).  

Seqirus, the manufacturer of aTIV has confirmed to the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC), Public Health 
England (PHE) and NHS England that they can supply enough vaccine for the population aged 65 years and over in the UK. 
The manufacturer has increased planned production and, following a request made by PSNC, has extended the window for 
ordering aTIV to Thursday 12th April 2018.  

Deliveries of aTIV to pharmacies and general practices across the UK will be phased:  

* 4 million doses will be available for delivery in September; 
* 2 million doses by mid-October; and 
* 3 million doses in early November.  

To ensure all pharmacies and general practices receive at least some of their order of aTIV early in the season, 
Seqirus have confirmed to PSNC that all orders (from pharmacies and general practices) will be re-phased, once 
they have all been placed, with the aim of giving all customers split deliveries across September, October and November. 
The volume of vaccine in each drop (month) is expected to be in line with the proportional availability of vaccine detailed above. 
PSNC supports this arrangement which should ensure that pharmacies, general practices and most importantly, patients will 
have equitable access to the vaccine.  

These phased delivery arrangements are for the 2018/19 season only.  

We are aware that contractors had previously been advised that they would not receive stock until October and this may have 
affected the quantities ordered. This is no longer the case and all pharmacies placing orders before 12th April 2018 
will receive some stock in Sept, Oct and Nov as above.  

In view of the above information on the phasing of aTIV supplies, **pharmacy contractors may wish to review their existing orders**.  

**Seqirus will accept orders for aTIV until Thursday 12th April 2018.**

Full details can be found in this [PSNC briefing](http://psnc.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/PSNC-Briefing-018.18-Flu-Vaccination-Service-2018-19-important-update-for-contractors.pdf).
